📖 docs updates for external types and submodule-layouts (#3055)
kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder: docs/book/src/reference/using_an_external_type.md

# Using an External Type

There are several different external types that may be referenced when writing a controller.
* A Custom Resource Definition (CRD) that is defined in the current project `kubebuilder create api`.

> * A Core Kubernetes Resources eg. `kubebuilder create api --group apps --version v1 --kind Deployment`.

Reviewer: I think this *could* be confusing for those that are new to writing controllers and make them think that in order to use a core Kubernetes resource they will need to run `kubebuilder create api ...`. 

It may be nice to mention or somehow point to the fact that most of the core Kubernetes resources can be imported.

```suggestion
* A Core Kubernetes Resources.
```

# Using an External Type

There are several different external types that may be referenced when writing a controller.

> * Custom Resource Definitions (CRD) that is defined in the current project `kubebuilder create api`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that are defined in the current project (such as via `kubebuilder create api`).
```

> * Core Kubernetes Resources eg. Deployments or Pods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Core Kubernetes Resources (e.g. Deployments or Pods).
```

> * CRD's that are created and installed in another project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* CRDs that are created and installed in another project.
```

> * A Custom Resource defined via an API Aggregation (AA). Aggregated APIs are subordinate APIServers that sit behind the primary API server, which acts as a proxy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A custom API defined via the aggregation layer, served by an extension API server for which the primary API server acts as a proxy.
```

> Currently Kubebuilder handles the first two, CRDs and Core Resources, seamlessly.  External CRDs and CRs created via Aggregation must be scaffolded manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently Kubebuilder handles the first two—CRDs and Core Resources—seamlessly. You must scaffold the latter two—External CRDs and APIs created via aggregation—manually.
```

```
github.com
    ├── theiruser
        ├── theirproject
            ├── apis
                ├── theirgroup
                   ├── doc.go
                   ├── install
                   │   ├── install.go
                   ├── v1alpha1
                   │   ├── doc.go
                   │   ├── register.go
                   │   ├── types.go
                   │   ├── zz_generated.deepcopy.go
```

In the case above the import path would be `github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1`

### Add a controller

be sure to answer no when it asks if you would like to create an api? [Y/n]
```shell
kubebuilder create api --group mygroup --version $APIVERSION --kind MyKind
```

## Edit the API files.

### Register your Types

Edit the following file to the pkg/apis directory to append their `AddToScheme` to your `AddToSchemes`:

file: pkg/apis/mytype_addtoscheme.go
```go
package apis

import (
	mygroupv1alpha1 "github.com/myuser/myrepo/apis/mygroup/v1alpha1"
	theirgroupv1alpha1 "github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1"
)

func init() {
	// Register the types with the Scheme so the components can map objects 
	// to GroupVersionKinds and back

> 	AddToSchemes = append(

Reviewer 3: `AddToSchemes` isn't defined at this point.

# Using an External Type

There are several different external types that may be referenced when writing a controller.
* Custom Resource Definitions (CRD) that is defined in the current project `kubebuilder create api`.
* Core Kubernetes Resources eg. Deployments or Pods.
* CRD's that are created and installed in another project.
* A Custom Resource defined via an API Aggregation (AA). Aggregated APIs are subordinate APIServers that sit behind the primary API server, which acts as a proxy.

Currently Kubebuilder handles the first two, CRDs and Core Resources, seamlessly.  External CRDs and CRs created via Aggregation must be scaffolded manually.

In order to use a Kubernetes Custom Resource that has been defined in another project
you will need to have several items of information.
* The Domain of the CR
* The Group under the Domain 
* The Go import path of the CR Type definition.

> 

Reviewer 4: Could we try to mainly add the content from https://book.kubebuilder.io/migration/manually_migration_guide_v2_v3.html#supportability as well?

Author: Content is gone, replaced the docs completely with a new version that is up to date

The Domain and Group variables have been discussed in other parts of the documentation.  The import path would be located in the project that installs the CR.

> This document uses `my` and `their` prefixes as a naming convention for repos, groups, and types to clearly distinguish between your own project and the external one you are referencing.

Reviewer 4: By default, we no longer have the group dir. Unless the project is configured to use multigroup. (ihmo) we need to explain it. Also, might not be necessary in all cases to have multi-group support to be able to reconcile an eternal type and the external type either might not have the group path

Author: Agreed. Rewrote the guide to not depend on multi-group layouts since it is not necessary for writing this guide. I think the guidance can be written with one single controller and then people can combine the guides together if they wish to have them coexist.

Example external API Aggregation directory structure
```
github.com
    ├── theiruser
        ├── theirproject
            ├── apis
                ├── theirgroup
                   ├── doc.go
                   ├── install
                   │   ├── install.go
                   ├── v1alpha1
                   │   ├── doc.go
                   │   ├── register.go
                   │   ├── types.go
                   │   ├── zz_generated.deepcopy.go
```

In the case above the import path would be `github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1`

> 

Reviewer 4: Could we not here also suggest using go get -u <module>?

> ### Create a project
> 
> ```shell
> kubebuilder init --domain $APIDOMAIN --owner "MyCompany"
> ```

Reviewer 4: I think we do not need this step. I think we can assume here that the project is created already. 
```suggestion

```

### Add a controller

be sure to answer no when it asks if you would like to create an api? [Y/n]
```shell
kubebuilder create api --group mygroup --version $APIVERSION --kind MyKind

> ```

Reviewer 4: I think we will need to recommend here to also update the PROJECT file with the import path. 
Could we check this one?

Author: This migration doc no longer exists. How should I proceed here?

Author: Added the Project updates for this guide in the md file and referenced the multi group tutorial separately

## Edit the API files.

> 

Reviewer 4: Could we not just only:

Step 1: Get the API module

In your project's directory, run the following command via the command line to get the external type module:
``$ go get -u github.com/external/api``

Step 2: Register the API with the scheme

In the main.go file, add the schema before the line Setup all Controllers:

```go
 ...
    // Adding the external type before setup all Controllers 
	if err := externaltypeimportalias.AddToScheme(mgr.GetScheme()); err != nil {
		log.Error(err, "")
		os.Exit(1)
	}
    
    // Setup all Controllers
	if err := controller.AddToManager(mgr); err != nil {
		log.Error(err, "")
		os.Exit(1)
	}
    ...
```

Author: Replaced this with a correct init scheme adjustment in main.go and the test files

### Register your Types

> Edit the following file to the pkg/apis directory to append their `AddToScheme` to your `AddToSchemes`:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Note that the manager will only have the schemas of Kubernetes core types and those Types that are created and owned by your project. Therefore, since it is and third-party one you need to edit the following file to the pkg/apis directory to append their `AddToScheme` to your `AddToSchemes`:
```

Reviewer 5: I think this is not what should happen. Usually you do not want to add external apis within your own apis. Thus you would rather call an additional Add To Scheme Method in your `main.go` instead of preadding one in apis

Reviewer 5: Actually you already did that comment in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3055#discussion_r1032751958 so im just gonna close this one here.

file: pkg/apis/mytype_addtoscheme.go
```go
package apis

import (
	mygroupv1alpha1 "github.com/myuser/myrepo/apis/mygroup/v1alpha1"

> 	theirgroupv1alpha1 "github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1"

Reviewer 4: This example is based on the layout of the projects that produce before Kubebuilder 2.0.0. We no longer scaffold groups by default. See: https://book.kubebuilder.io/migration/multi-group.html 

So, I think we need to update these steps and explain to them it

Author: Added a small hint that this is using multigroup APIs here and linked the multi group migration tutorial

Reviewer 4: Ideally, we explain things with the default layout 
However, I am OK if we add a note for that.

Author: Changed it so that we use the default layout now instead of the multigroup one.

)

func init() {
	// Register the types with the Scheme so the components can map objects 
	// to GroupVersionKinds and back
	AddToSchemes = append(
	  AddToSchemes, 
	  mygroupv1alpha1.SchemeBuilder.AddToScheme,
	  theirgroupv1alpha1.SchemeBuilder.AddToScheme,

> 	)

Reviewer 4: I do not know if this syntax still working OR if we should suggested register the schema via the main.go:

```go
if err := importExternalType.AddToScheme(mgr.GetScheme()); err != nil {
		log.Error(err, "")
		os.Exit(1)
	}
```

> }

Reviewer 4: I no longer know if the above is possible. I think we can describe both options ( via the main.go and via the init under the API same group of the third-party project ) but we need to test it out to see if still valid.

Reviewer 5: Have to test and see what is easier on the flow. Will get back to that

Author: Replaced this guidance with a guidance that actually works and that I tested

```

## Edit the Controller files

### Use the correct imports for your API

file: pkg/controllers/mytype_controller.go
```go
package controllers

import (
	mygroupv1alpha1 "github.com/myuser/myrepo/apis/mygroup/v1alpha1"
	theirgroupv1alpha1 "github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1"
)
```

Note that core resources may simply be imported by depending on the API's from upstream Kubernetes:

```go
package controllers
// contains core resources like Deployment
import (
   v1 "k8s.io/api/apps/v1"
)

> ```

Reviewer 4: WDYT about we use the class note here with a header like Kubernetes core types import

Author: Not sure if i understand what this is meaning, mind explaining what you want me to do?

Reviewer 4: We can deal with CoreTypes.
See: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c172069e83d81cc4a6ce67a7a1c3fd2a6e7e2d00/pkg/plugins/golang/options.go#L28-L54

Also, see: 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4-multigroup/PROJECT#L86-L90

Author: I just verified this on main and I am certain that by default both the PROJECT file is not looking like the testdata file.

When running 
```
go mod init github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube
kubebuilder init
[kubebuilder edit --multigroup=true]
kubebuilder create api --group theirgroup --version v1alpha1 --kind ExternalType --controller --resource=false
kubebuilder create api --version v1 --kind Pod --controller --resource=false
```

it always results in the following PROJECT entries:
```
# Code generated by tool. DO NOT EDIT.
# This file is used to track the info used to scaffold your project
# and allow the plugins properly work.
# More info: https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/project-config.html
domain: my.domain
layout:
- go.kubebuilder.io/v4
[multigroup: true]
projectName: testkube
repo: github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube
resources:
- controller: true
  domain: my.domain
  group: theirgroup
  kind: ExternalType
  version: v1alpha1
- controller: true
  domain: my.domain
  kind: Pod
  version: v1
version: "3"
```

What i am referring to is that the api.path element is not set correctly and for core types the `domain` should not be set because this leads to the following generation:

```
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=my.domain,resources=pods,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=my.domain,resources=pods/status,verbs=get;update;patch
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=my.domain,resources=pods/finalizers,verbs=update
```

### Update dependencies

```
go mod tidy
```

> 

Reviewer 4: I think we also need to recommend checking if the kind defined by the other project will be applied to the cluster.

```suggestion
### Use the Discovery API to see if the new API is present

The best approach at this point is to make sure that the resource is available in the cluster because we are using a third-party API. So that, when the manager initializes we should ensure that the external type required is applied to the cluster. 

#### Let's start by creating the discovery client:

```go
// Get a config to talk to the apiserver
    cfg, err := config.GetConfig()
    if err != nil {
        log.Error(err, "")
        os.Exit(1)
    }
    
    // Create the discoveryClient
    discoveryClient, err := discovery.NewDiscoveryClientForConfig(cfg)
    if err != nil {
        log.Error(err, "Unable to create discovery client")
        os.Exit(1)
    }
```

#### Now, we can search for all API resources as follows:

```go
    // Get a list of all API's on the cluster
    apiGroup, apiResourceList , err := discoveryClient.ServerGroupsAndResources()
    if err != nil {
        log.Error(err, "Unable to get Group and Resources")
        os.Exit(1)
    }
```

<aside class="note">
<h1>Checking the resources applied on the cluster with kubectl</h1>

Note that by using the kubectl api-resources command, it is possible to check the resources available in the cluster.

</aside>

#### Now, we can check and verify if the resource is or is not on the cluster:

```
    // Looking for the external Type
    for i := 0; i < len(apiResourceList); i++ {
        if  apiResourceList[i].Kind == kind {
            // found the Kind
        }
    }
```
Note: Check the [APIResourceList](https://godoc.org/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1#APIResourceList) GoDoc to see other options. Also, see that you could either use [APIGroup](https://godoc.org/k8s.io/apimachinery/pkg/apis/meta/v1#APIGroup)  where within is possible to use other attributes, such as the Group, Version, and Kind.

```

Reviewer 5: IMO we should decide wether we want to recommend an in-code guide with interaction on startup (if the crd is there) or if we simply want to use kubectl here directly. After All we can just get the CRDs and verify their kind e.g. `kubectl api-resources --api-group=telemetry.istio.io` or `kubectl describe crds` instead of the incode guide. WDYT?

Reviewer 4: Hi @jakobmoellersap,

Not sure if I properly follow up sorry. But I think in the suggestion we are using the discovery client and then checking if the Kind(CRD) is or not applied on the cluster. if not then, we return an error and kill the manager. Also, we are adding a note to let the users are able to check the docs and see all options.

However, please, feel free to shape it as you see fit. I just tried to provide an example of the suggestions and what I think it is missing.

Reviewer: Maybe it makes sense to highlight that there are different ways to accomplish this rather than providing an explicit example and that it is up to the reader to implement what they feel is the best approach for their case?

# Using an External Type

There are several different external types that may be referenced when writing a controller.
* Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) that are defined in the current project (such as via `kubebuilder create api`).
* Core Kubernetes Resources (e.g. Deployments or Pods).
* CRDs that are created and installed in another project.
* A custom API defined via the aggregation layer, served by an extension API server for which the primary API server acts as a proxy.

> Currently Kubebuilder handles the first two—CRDs and Core Resources—seamlessly. You must scaffold the latter two—External CRDs and APIs created via aggregation—manually.

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
Currently Kubebuilder handles the first two, CRDs and Core Resources, seamlessly. You must scaffold the latter two, External CRDs and APIs created via aggregation, manually.
```

repo: github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube
resources:
- controller: true
  domain: theirs.com
  group: mygroup
  kind: ExternalType
  version: v1alpha1
version: "3"
```

Adjusting the generated RBAC manifests:

file: internal/controller/externaltype_controller.go
```go
// ExternalTypeReconciler reconciles a ExternalType object
type ExternalTypeReconciler struct {
	client.Client
	Scheme *runtime.Scheme
}

//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes/status,verbs=get;update;patch
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes/finalizers,verbs=update

```

#### Using a type included in the Kubernetes Core Resources

file: PROJECT
```
domain: my.domain
layout:
- go.kubebuilder.io/v4
projectName: testkube
repo: github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube
resources:
- controller: true
  domain: ""                                                                                                                                                                                             
  kind: Pod
  version: v1alpha1

> version: "3"

Reviewer 4: It is no longer required for CoreTypes, see; 

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4-multigroup/PROJECT#L86-L90

> ```

Reviewer 4: We can deal with CoreTypes.
See: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c172069e83d81cc4a6ce67a7a1c3fd2a6e7e2d00/pkg/plugins/golang/options.go#L28-L54

Also, see: 
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/master/testdata/project-v4-multigroup/PROJECT#L86-L90

So, we need test out with a CoreType to properly describe the steps here.

Author: Please take a look at https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/pull/3055#discussion_r1413711226. I believe the core type behavior is not working as expected as its setting the domain to the PROJECT global domain. This will lead to wrong rbac annotations being created. Maybe a misunderstanding on my side?

Reviewer 4: We do not need to change the PROJECT file and imports (if I am not wrong)
But yep the Markers for RBAC show that we still need to fix it manually

Author: understood. I will then remove the PROJECT file changes, but still incorporate the RBAC changes.

Adjusting the generated RBAC manifests:

file: internal/controller/externaltype_controller.go
```go
// PodReconciler reconciles a Pod object
type ExternalTypeReconciler struct {
	client.Client
	Scheme *runtime.Scheme
}

//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods/status,verbs=get;update;patch
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=core,resources=pods/finalizers,verbs=update

```

### Register your Types

Edit the following lines to the main.go file to register the external types:

file: cmd/main.go
```go
package apis

import (
	theirgroupv1alpha1 "github.com/theiruser/theirproject/apis/theirgroup/v1alpha1"
)

func init() {
	utilruntime.Must(clientgoscheme.AddToScheme(scheme))
	utilruntime.Must(theirgroupv1alpha1.AddToScheme(scheme)) // this contains the external API types
	//+kubebuilder:scaffold:scheme
} 
```

> ## Edit the Controller `SetupWithManager function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Edit the Controller `SetupWithManager` function
```

The Domain of the CR is `theirs.com`, the Group is `theirgroup` and the kind and go type would be `ExternalType`.

If there is an interest to have multiple Controllers running in different Groups (e.g. because one is an owned CRD and one is an external Type), please first
reconfigure the Project to use a multi-group layout as described in the [Multi-Group documentation](../migration/multi-group.md).

### Prerequisites

The following guide assumes that you have already created a project using `kubebuilder init` in a directory in the GOPATH. Please reference the [Getting Started Guide](../getting-started.md) for more information.

Note that if you did not pass `--domain` to `kubebuilder init` you will need to modify it for the individual api types as the default is `my.domain`, not `theirs.com`.
Similarly, if you intend to use your own domain, please configure your own domain with `kubebuilder init` and do not use `theirs.com for the domain.

### Add a controller for the external Type

#### Using a type not included in the Kubernetes Core Resources

> We will now add a controller for the given type

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Run the command `create api` to scaffold the controller to manage the External Kind: 
```

```shell

> kubebuilder create api --group theirgroup --version v1alpha1 --kind ExternalType --controller --resource=false

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
kubebuilder create api --group <theirgroup> --version v1alpha1 --kind <ExternalTypeKind> --controller --resource=false
```

```

Note that the `resource` argument is set to false, as we are not attempting to create our own CustomResourceDefinition,
but instead rely on an external one.

This will result in a `PROJECT` entry with the default domain of the `PROJECT` (`my.domain` if not specified in `kubebuilder init`).

> For use of other domains, such as `theirs.com`, one will have to manually adjust the `PROJECT` file with the correct domain for the entry:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For use of other domains, such as `theirs.com`, one will have to manually adjust the `PROJECT` file with the correct domain for the entry and the path for the external API:
```

> file: PROJECT

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Example:
```

```
domain: my.domain
layout:
- go.kubebuilder.io/v4

> projectName: testkube

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
projectName: example
```

> repo: github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
repo: example.com
```

resources:
- controller: true

>   domain: theirs.com

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  domain: my.domain ## <- Replace the domain with theirs.com domain
```

  group: mygroup
  kind: ExternalType

>   version: v1alpha1

Reviewer 4: You need add the path

like we do for the core types

```
- controller: true
  group: apps
  kind: Deployment
  path: k8s.io/api/apps/v1
  version: v1
```

We no longer use domain. 
See that the old doc is very outdated.

Author: As i said before, path is not set by default at all when using the current main. If i try a kubebuilder init and a create api, it will not use path but domain.

Reviewer 4: Hi @jakobmoellerdev 

Following the structure, see: (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/3c9cf656ce4d62a10c8e78a1c0f066de47c983db/testdata/project-v4/PROJECT#L10-L23)

```yaml
resources:
- api:
    crdVersion: v1
    namespaced: true
  controller: true
  domain: testproject.org <- Replace for the domain (valid only for external types, Core types will have this info by default when required)
  group: crew
  kind: Captain
  path: sigs.k8s.io/kubebuilder/testdata/project-v4/api/v1 <- Replace for the path/import (valid only for external types. Core types will have this info by default)
  version: v1
  webhooks:
    defaulting: true
    validation: true
    webhookVersion: v1
```

	Scheme *runtime.Scheme
}

//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes,verbs=get;list;watch;create;update;patch;delete
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes/status,verbs=get;update;patch
//+kubebuilder:rbac:groups=theirgroup.theirs.com,resources=externaltypes/finalizers,verbs=update
```

#### Using a type included in the Kubernetes Core Resources

Alternatively, one can also use [core resources](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kubebuilder/blob/c172069e83d81cc4a6ce67a7a1c3fd2a6e7e2d00/pkg/plugins/golang/options.go#L28-L54), such as Pods, as a controlled resource:

```shell
kubebuilder create api --version v1 --kind Pod --controller --resource=false
```

Similarly, the default domain will be used, so it has to be corrected:

file: PROJECT
```
domain: my.domain
layout:
- go.kubebuilder.io/v4
projectName: testkube
repo: github.com/jakobmoellerdev/testkube
resources:
- controller: true
  domain: ""                                                                                                                                                                                             
  kind: Pod
  version: v1alpha1

> version: "3"

Reviewer 4: I would like to suggest we remove this part and add it at the end add a note like:

```
If you are looking to create Controllers to manage Kubernetes Core types (i.e. Deployments/Pods):

Then you do not need to update the PROJECT file or register the Schema in the manager. All Core Types are registered by default. The Kubebuilder CLI will add the required values to the PROJECT file, but you still need to perform changes to the RBAC markers manually to ensure that the Rules will be generated accordingly.
```
